Rishi Sunak, 42 Education Winchester College. Philosophy, politics and economics at Oxford university. MBA from Stanford. Family Married Akshata Murty, daughter of the Indian billionaire NR Narayana Murthy, in 2009. They have two daughters. Before government Analyst at investment bank Goldman Sachs. Partner at hedge fund management firm the Children’s Investment Fund Management. Constituency Richmond (Yorkshire), elected in 2015 In government Junior minister for local government (2018-19), chief secretary to the Treasury (2019-20), chancellor of the exchequer (2020-22). Career high Winning praise for rapidly introducing “furlough” support schemes worth billions of pounds to preserve jobs and businesses during 18 months of Covid lockdowns. Achilles heel His family’s wealth and his wife’s controversial non-dom status. Gaffes Said that food where he would most notice a price rise was bread, because “we have all different breads in my house”. What others say A lot like Philip Hammond, just with a bit more charisma” – Anonymous economist. [He] has watched a lot of [Tony] Blair body language and is managing to distance while being the most central to the government” – Tim Shipman of the Sunday Times. Little-known fact A self-described “coke addict” – of the Mexican version of Coca-Cola, which is made from cane sugar. Campaign to be prime minister Key backers Dominic Raab, Jeremy Hunt, Norman Lamont. Attack lines on rival Accused Liz Truss of promoting “socialism” by promising unfunded tax cuts and described plans to “borrow your way out of inflation” as “a fairytale”. On the economy Promises “a return to traditional Conservative economic values”, a position seen variously as a pitch to instinctive Tory fiscal prudence, or a desire to return to “austerity economics”. Differs from Truss on tax cuts, saying acting now would stoke inflation and increase borrowing. On home affairs Supports Rwanda removal scheme, though No 10 sources have briefed that he opposed it as chancellor. Promises a “crackdown on grooming gangs” and has pledged to create a requirement for all police forces to have a ringfenced child sexual exploitation team. On the environment Would set a new legal target for the UK to be energy independent by 2045 at the latest. Committed to maintaining government’s legally binding goal of reaching net zero emissions by 2050 and has assured the Tories’ green wing he would protect the environment. * * * Liz Truss, 46 Education Roundhay secondary school in Leeds. Philosophy, politics and economics at Oxford university. Family Married to accountant Hugh O’Leary since 2000. They have two daughters. Before government Worked as an accountant for Shell and Cable &amp; Wireless. Deputy director of the right-of-centre Reform thinktank. Constituency South West Norfolk, elected 2010. In government Junior education minister (2012–14), environment minister (2014–16), lord chancellor (2016-17), chief secretary to the Treasury (2017-19), international trade minister (2019-21), equalities minister (2019–present), foreign secretary (2021–present). Career high Elevation to foreign secretary, placing her at the forefront of Britain’s global push to support Ukraine. Oversaw moves to secure releases of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe and Anoosheh Ashoori from Iran. Achilles heel Background as a one-time Liberal Democrat who called for the abolition of the monarchy, and a Remainer who opposed Brexit. Gaffes Getting lost while trying to leave her press conference setting out her leadership stall. Told parliament: “In any trade deal we strike we will be taking into account our high standards to make sure our farmers are undermined.” Little known fact Daughter of parents she described as “to the left of Labour”. Her “horrified” father discovered she had joined the Conservatives by picking up a postcard at the family home reading: “I can’t believe you’ve become a Tory, Liz.” What others say Maybot 2.0” – some Tory MPs, according to the Spectator. No, no. They call her the human hand grenade because she gets things done” – Nadine Dorries, denying that a moniker for Truss among civil servants is because she causes chaos. Campaign to be prime minister Key backers Nadine Dorries, Jacob Rees-Mogg, perhaps Boris Johnson, the Daily Mail. Attack lines Told Sunak in a debate that he had raised taxes to the highest level in 70 years, adding: “That is not going to raise economic growth.” Accused him of raising national insurance in the face of opposition from her and others at cabinet. On the economy Would reverse the national insurance rate rise, designed to fund health and social care. Wants to continue the Johnsonian levelling-up agenda, but based around low tax and low regulation zones. Told the Spectator she would treat borrowing built up during the pandemic like a war debt to be written off over a long period. On culture wars Joined former leadership contender Kemi Badenoch in attacking Penny Mordaunt, telling a debate she had opposed moving ahead with self-identification for transgender people. On home affairs Has reportedly said she would attempt to expand the Rwanda migrant removal scheme to countries such as Turkey. On the environment Committed to maintaining the government’s legally binding goal of reaching net zero emissions by 2050, but would suspend green energy levies.